A Neural Edge-Detection Model for
Enhanced Auditory Sensitivity in
Modulated Noise

Alon Fishbach and Bradford J. May
Department of Biomedical Engineering and Otolaryngology-HNS
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21205
fishbach@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Psychophysical data suggest that temporal modulations of stimulus
amplitude envelopes play a prominent role in the perceptual
segregation of concurrent sounds. In particular, the detection of an
unmodulated signal can be significantly improved by adding
amplitude modulation to the spectral envelope of a competing
masking noise. This perceptual phenomenon is known as
?Comodulation Masking Release? (CMR). Despite the obvious
influence of temporal structure on the perception of complex
auditory scenes, the physiological mechanisms that contribute to
CMR and auditory streaming are not well known. A recent
physiological study by Nelken and colleagues has demonstrated an
enhanced cortical representation of auditory signals in modulated
noise. Our study evaluates these CMR-like response patterns from
the perspective of a hypothetical auditory edge-detection neuron. It
is shown that this simple neural model for the detection of
amplitude transients can reproduce not only the physiological data
of Nelken et al., but also, in light of previous results, a variety of
physiological and psychoacoustical phenomena that are related to
the perceptual segregation of concurrent sounds.

1

In t rod u ct i on

The temporal structure of a complex sound exerts strong influences on auditory
physiology (e.g. [10, 16]) and perception (e.g. [9, 19, 20]). In particular, studies of
auditory scene analysis have demonstrated the importance of the temporal structure
of amplitude envelopes in the perceptual segregation of concurrent sounds [2, 7].
Common amplitude transitions across frequency serve as salient cues for grouping
sound energy into unified perceptual objects. Conversely, asynchronous amplitude
transitions enhance the separation of competing acoustic events [3, 4].

These general principles are manifested in perceptual phenomena as diverse as
comodulation masking release (CMR) [13], modulation detection interference [22]
and synchronous onset grouping [8].
Despite the obvious importance of timing information in psychoacoustic studies of
auditory masking, the way in which the CNS represents the temporal structure of an
amplitude envelope is not well understood. Certainly many physiological studies
have demonstrated neural sensitivities to envelope transitions, but this sensitivity is
only beginning to be related to the variety of perceptual experiences that are evoked
by signals in noise.
Nelken et al. [15] have suggested a correspondence between neural responses to
time-varying amplitude envelopes and psychoacoustic masking phenomena. In their
study of neurons in primary auditory cortex (A1), adding temporal modulation to
background noise lowered the detection thresholds of unmodulated tones. This
enhanced signal detection is similar to the perceptual phenomenon that is known as
comodulation masking release [13].
Fishbach et al. [11] have recently proposed a neural model for the detection of
?auditory edges? (i.e., amplitude transients) that can account for numerous
physiological [14, 17, 18] and psychoacoustical [3, 21] phenomena. The
encompassing utility of this edge-detection model suggests a common mechanism
that may link the auditory processing and perception of auditory signals in a
complex auditory scene. Here, it is shown that the auditory edge detection model
can accurately reproduce the cortical CMR-like responses previously described by
Nelken and colleagues.

2

Th e M od el

The model is described in detail elsewhere [11]. In short, the basic operation of the
model is the calculation of the first-order time derivative of the log-compressed
envelope of the stimulus. A computational model [23] is used to convert the
acoustic waveform to a physiologically plausible auditory nerve representation (Fig
1a). The simulated neural response has a medium spontaneous rate and a
characteristic frequency that is set to the frequency of the target tone. To allow
computation of the time derivative of the stimulus envelope, we hypothesize the
existence of a temporal delay dimension, along which the stimulus is progressively
delayed. The intermediate delay layer (Fig 1b) is constructed from an array of
neurons with ascending membrane time constants (?); each neuron is modeled by a
conventional integrate-and-fire model (I&F, [12]). Higher membrane time constant
induces greater delay in the neuron?s response [1].
The output of the delay layer converges to a single output neuron (Fig. 1c) via a set
of connection with various efficacies that reflect a receptive field of a gaussian
derivative. This combination of excitatory and inhibitory connections carries out the
time-derivative computation. Implementation details and parameters are given in
[11]. The model has 2 adjustable and 6 fixed parameters, the former were used to fit
the responses of the model to single unit responses to variety of stimuli [11]. The
results reported here are not sensitive to these parameters.

(a) AN model

(b) delay-layer

(c) edge-detector
neuron

?=6 ms

I&F
Neuron

?=4 ms
?=3 ms
bandpass

log

d
dt

RMS

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of the model and a block diagram of the basic
operation of each model component (shaded area). The stimulus is converted to a
neural representation (a) that approximates the average firing rate of a medium
spontaneous-rate AN fiber [23]. The operation of this stage can be roughly
described as the log-compressed rms output of a bandpass filter. The neural
representation is fed to a series of neurons with ascending membrane time constant
(b). The kernel functions that are used to simulate these neurons are plotted for a
few neurons along with the time constants used. The output of the delay-layer
neurons converge to a single I&F neuron (c) using a set of connections with weights
that reflect a shape of a gaussian derivative. Solid arrows represent excitatory
connections and white arrows represent inhibitory connections. The absolute
efficacy is represented by the width of the arrows.

3

Resu lt s

Nelken et al. [15] report that amplitude modulation can substantially modify the
noise-driven discharge rates of A1 neurons in Halothane-anesthetized cats. Many
cortical neurons show only a transient onset response to unmodulated noise but fire
in synchrony (?lock?) to the envelope of modulated noise. A significant reduction in
envelope-locked discharge rates is observed if an unmodulated tone is added to
modulated noise. As summarized in Fig. 2, this suppression of envelope locking can
reveal the presence of an auditory signal at sound pressure levels that are not
detectable in unmodulated noise. It has been suggested that this pattern of neural
responding may represent a physiological equivalent of CMR.
Reproduction of CMR-like cortical activity can be illustrated by a simplified case in
which the analytical amplitude envelope of the stimulus is used as the input to the
edge-detector model. In keeping with the actual physiological approach of Nelken et
al., the noise envelope is shaped by a trapezoid modulator for these simulations.
Each cycle of modulation, E N(t), is given by:
t
0?t <D
P
D ? t < 3D
E N (t ) =
P ? DP (t ? 3 D ) 3 D ? t < 4 D
0
4 D ? t < 8D


P
D





where P is the peak pressure level and D is set to 12.5 ms.

(b) Modulated noise

76

Spikes/sec

Tone level (dB SPL)

(a) Unmodulated noise

26
0

150

300 0
150
300
Time (ms)
Figure 2: Responses of an A1 unit to a combination of noise and tone at many tone
levels, replotted from Nelken et al. [15]. (a) Unmodulated noise and (b) modulated
noise. The noise envelope is illustrated by the thick line above each figure. Each
row shows the response of the neuron to the noise plus the tone at the level specified
on the ordinate. The dashed line in (b) indicates the detection threshold level for the
tone. The detection threshold (as defined and calculated by Nelken et al.) in the
unmodulated noise was not reached.

Since the basic operation of the model is the calculation of the rectified timederivative of the log-compressed envelope of the stimulus, the expected noisedriven rate of the model can be approximated by:

(





)


d
M N ( t ) = max 0,
A ln 1 +
dt


E (t )
P0



where A=20/ln(10) and P0 =2e-5 Pa. The expected firing rate in response to the noise
plus an unmodulated signal (tone) can be similarly approximated by:
M N + S ( t ) = max 0,





	

(

)


d
A ln 1 +
dt

E ( t ) + PS
P0





where PS is the peak pressure level of the tone. Clearly, both MN (t) and MN+S (t) are
identically zero outside the interval [0 D]. Within this interval it holds that:

M N (t ) =

AP
D

P0 +

P
D

t

0?t<D

and

M N + S (t ) =

AP
D

P0 + PS +

P
D

t

0?t<D

and the ratio of the firing rates is:
M N (t )
PS
=1 +
M N + S (t )
P0 + DP t

0?t< D

Clearly, M N + S < M N for the interval [0 D] of each modulation cycle. That is, the
addition of a tone reduces the responses of the model to the rising part of the
modulated envelope. Higher tone levels (Ps ) cause greater reduction in the model?s
firing rate.

(c)

(b)

Level derivative
(dB SPL/ms)

Level (dB SPL)

(a)

(d)

Time (ms)

Figure 3: An illustration of the basic operation of the model on various amplitude
envelopes. The simplified operation of the model includes log compression of the
amplitude envelope (a and c) and rectified time-derivative of the log-compressed
envelope (b and d). (a) A 30 dB SPL tone is added to a modulated envelope (peak
level of 70 dB SPL) 300 ms after the beginning of the stimulus (as indicated by the
horizontal line). The addition of the tone causes a great reduction in the time
derivative of the log-compressed envelope (b). When the envelope of the noise is
unmodulated (c), the time-derivative of the log-compressed envelope (d) shows a
tiny spike when the tone is added (marked by the arrow).

Fig. 3 demonstrates the effect of a low-level tone on the time-derivative of the logcompressed envelope of a noise. When the envelope is modulated (Fig. 3a) the
addition of the tone greatly reduces the derivative of the rising part of the
modulation (Fig. 3b). In the absence of modulations (Fig. 3c), the tone presentation
produces a negligible effect on the level derivative (Fig. 3d).
Model simulations of neural responses to the stimuli used by Nelken et al. are
plotted in Fig. 4. As illustrated schematically in Fig 3 (d), the presence of the tone
does not cause any significant change in the responses of the model to the
unmodulated noise (Fig. 4a). In the modulated noise, however, tones of relatively
low levels reduce the responses of the model to the rising part of the envelope
modulations.

(b) Modulated noise

76

Spikes/sec

Tone level (dB SPL)

(a) Unmodulated noise

26
0

150

300 0
Time (ms)

150

300

Figure 4: Simulated responses of the model to a combination of a tone and
Unmodulated noise (a) and modulated noise (b). All conventions are as in Fig. 2.

4

Di scu ssi on

This report uses an auditory edge-detection model to simulate the actual
physiological consequences of amplitude modulation on neural sensitivity in
cortical area A1. The basic computational operation of the model is the calculation
of the smoothed time-derivative of the log-compressed stimulus envelope. The
ability of the model to reproduce cortical response patterns in detail across a variety
of stimulus conditions suggests similar time-sensitive mechanisms may contribute to
the physiological correlates of CMR.
These findings augment our previous observations that the simple edge-detection
model can successfully predict a wide range of physiological and perceptual
phenomena [11]. Former applications of the model to perceptual phenomena have
been mainly related to auditory scene analysis, or more specifically the ability of the
auditory system to distinguish multiple sound sources. In these cases, a sharp
amplitude transition at stimulus onset (?auditory edge?) was critical for sound
segregation. Here, it is shown that the detection of acoustic signals also may be
enhanced through the suppression of ongoing responses to the concurrent
modulations of competing background sounds. Interestingly, these temporal
fluctuations appear to be a common property of natural soundscapes [15].
The model provides testable predictions regarding how signal detection may be
influenced by the temporal shape of amplitude modulation. Carlyon et al. [6]
measured CMR in human listeners using three types of noise modulation: squarewave, sine wave and multiplied noise. From the perspective of the edge-detection
model, these psychoacoustic results are intriguing because the different modulator
types represent manipulations of the time derivative of masker envelopes. Squarewave modulation had the most sharply edged time derivative and produced the
greatest masking release.
Fig. 5 plots the responses of the model to a pure-tone signal in square-wave and
sine-wave modulated noise. As in the psychoacoustical data of Carlyon et al., the
simulated detection threshold was lower in the context of square-wave modulation.
Our modeling results suggest that the sharply edged square wave evoked higher
levels of noise-driven activity and therefore created a sensitive background for the
suppressing effects of the unmodulated tone.

(b)

60

Spikes/sec

Tone level (dB SPL)

(a)

10
0

200

400

600 0
Time (ms)

200

400

600

Figure 5: Simulated responses of the model to a combination of a tone at various
levels and a sine-wave modulated noise (a) or a square-wave modulated noise (b).
Each row shows the response of the model to the noise plus the tone at the level
specified on the abscissa. The shape of the noise modulator is illustrated above each
figure. The 100 ms tone starts 250 ms after the noise onset. Note that the tone
detection threshold (marked by the dashed line) is 10 dB lower for the square-wave
modulator than for the sine-wave modulator, in accordance with the
psychoacoustical data of Carlyon et al. [6].
Although the physiological basis of our model was derived from studies of neural
responses in the cat auditory system, the key psychoacoustical observations of
Carlyon et al. have been replicated in recent behavioral studies of cats (Budelis et
al. [5]).
These data support the generalization of human perceptual processing to other
species and enhance the possible correspondence between the neuronal CMR-like
effect and the psychoacoustical masking phenomena.
Clearly, the auditory system relies on information other than the time derivative of
the stimulus envelope for the detection of auditory signals in background noise.
Further physiological and psychoacoustic assessments of CMR-like masking effects
are needed not only to refine the predictive abilities of the edge-detection model but
also to reveal the additional sources of acoustic information that influence signal
detection in constantly changing natural environments.

Ackn ow led g men t s
This work was supported in part by a NIDCD grant R01 DC004841.

